SIMD-0582: Early detection of instruction trace overflow (#582)
solana-foundation/solana-improvement-documents: proposals/0582-instruction-cpi-limit.md

---
simd: '0582'
title: Early detection of instruction trace overflow
authors:
  - Lucas Steuernagel
category: Standard
type: Core
status: Draft
created: 2026-07-13
feature: (fill in with feature key and github tracking issues once accepted)
---

## Summary

The protocol only allows a transaction to execute 64 instructions, accounting 
for both top level and CPIs. Runtime counts executed instructions to determine 
when to fail a transaction. This SIMD proposes counting the top level 
instructions (executed or not) plus the executed CPIs. Consequently, 

> transactions that exceed the instruction trace length will fail early.

Reviewer: I think you could clarify this second half of the summary paragraph by saying "This SIMD proposes _first_ counting _all_ top level instructions and _then_ counting each CPI as the runtime attempts to add each CPI frame."

Something like that would help elucidate the design change.

## Motivation

The primary motivator for this change is ABIv2 

> [SIMD-177](https://github.com/solana-foundation/solana-improvement-documents/pull/177).

Reviewer: I think speeding up transactions is a more pertinent motivation than a feature we haven't even finished designing yet.

The new memory layout exposes all top level instructions for every instruction 
in a transaction in pre-defined address spaces for exactly 64 instructions. 
Allowing a CPI in a transaction with 64 top level instructions, or, likewise, 
two CPIs in a transaction with 63 top level instructions, would cause runtime 
to overwrite a memory region already reserved for other purposes, due to 
the reservation of only 64 regions for instructions.

A second motivation would be slightly speeding up transactions that are going 
to fail regardless. This SIMD proposes failing offending transactions earlier, 
increasing block space for well formed ones.

## New Terminology

No new terminology introduced in this document.

## Detailed Design

When pushing the instruction to be processed onto the execution stack, the 
runtime must verify if the total number of top level instructions plus the 

> number of CPIs does not exceed the maximum allowed instructions in the trace.

Reviewer: I think you could expand on this paragraph a bit, and say something like "Currently, the total number of instructions (top-level + CPI) is checked against the limit as each instruction is executed. This means that a transaction with 64 top-level instructions, whose _first_ instruction performs a CPI, will still have the 62 out of the remaining 63 instructions executed, before finally exceeding the limit on its 64th."

Something like that. Then after it you can introduce the new top-level-eager approach.

Below is a basic snippet of how this verification is recommended to look like:

```
if number_of_top_level_instructions_in_tx + number_of_cpis > 64 {
  return Err(InstructionError::InstructionTraceLengthExceeded);
}

> ```

Reviewer: Works for me, but just mention earlier that the number of CPIs is tallied each time a CPI is invoked. It can't be tracked ahead of time, and won't be by this SIMD.

It is worth pointing that the number of CPIs aforementioned already accounts 
for the CPI that is about to be pushed onto the execution stack, if we are not 
dealing with a top level instruction.

### Edge Cases

> No edge case appears prominent enought to listed.

Reviewer: I would list the 64-instruction edge case that motivated this SIMD, and that I described a bit in my [earlier comment](https://github.com/solana-foundation/solana-improvement-documents/pull/582/changes#r3603309560).

| Transaction Execution (Runtime) | A condition is changing place       |
| Virtual Machine                 | None                                |
| Block Packing                   | None                                |
| Consensus                       | None                                |
| Gossip                          | None                                |
| Turbine                         | None                                |
| Snapshots                       | None                                |
| On-Chain Core BPF Programs      | None                                |
| Other (please describe)         | None                                |

## Alternatives Considered

We have considered revising the address layout for ABIv2 
[SIMD-177](https://github.com/solana-foundation/solana-improvement-documents/pull/177)
to acommodate extra spaces for CPIs executed in transactions with 64 top level 
instructions or similar high numbers. We eliminated such alternative because 
these transactions would always fail. The address layout acommodation wouldn't 
benefit developers and would only increase complexity both for runtime and 

> programs.

Reviewer: nit: this can probably just be `None`. We aren't depending on ABIv2 for this SIMD and the PR is not anywhere close to being accepted and merged. This is also an ABIv1 feature and it has sufficient motivation to stand on its own regardless of any ABIv2 encouragement.

Reviewer: Yeah, but that would be discussed in the ABIv2 SIMD. It's actually weird to mention it here in this SIMD at all, since this change has pretty solid motivation on its own. I maintain we shouldn't even mention it anywhere in here.

## Impact

There must be no difference to dapp developers, except for the number of CUs 

> consumed by transactions that fail with instruction trace length exceeded.

Reviewer: Some of the dApp impact is more subtle here. If somebody was firing off a transaction with tons of instructions and failures were happening earlier in the stack, they'd be seeing those instruction errors, and the transaction's execution would exit and return them before the limit was reached. Now, they'd see the limit exceeded before even hitting potentially failure-prone instructions (perhaps midway through their transaction).

Again, it's a subtle case, but it's worth mentioning I think. You could also mention the transaction logs.

The protocol only allows a transaction to execute 64 instructions, accounting 
for both top level and CPIs. Runtime counts executed instructions to determine 
when to fail a transaction. This SIMD proposes counting all top level 
instructions (executed or not) plus the executed CPIs, as the runtime attempts 
to add each instruction frame. Consequently, transactions that exceed the 
instruction trace length will fail early.

## Motivation

A motivation would be slightly speeding up transactions that are going 
to fail regardless. This SIMD proposes failing offending transactions earlier, 

> increasing block space for well formed ones.

Reviewer: Can we make this more definitive? "The primary motivation is".

to overwrite a memory region already reserved for other purposes, due to 
the reservation of only 64 regions for instructions.

## New Terminology

No new terminology introduced in this document.

## Detailed Design

Currently, the total number of instructions (top-level + CPI) is checked 

> agains the limit as each instruction is executed. Consequently, a transaction 

Reviewer: nit

```suggestion
against the limit as each instruction is executed. Consequently, a transaction
```

with 64 top-level instructions, whose first instruction performs a CPI, will 

> still have 62 out of the remaining 63 instruction to be executed before 

Reviewer: nit:

```suggestion
still have 62 out of the remaining 63 instructions executed before
```

Reviewer: Might have to touch up the line width. The idea is to clearly show that we're forcing the validator to execute 63 instructions when, after one CPI, it can already understand the transaction will break the limit, therefore executing them is wasteful.

It is worth pointing that the number of CPIs aforementioned already accounts 
for the CPI that is about to be pushed onto the execution stack, if we are not 
dealing with a top level instruction. The number of CPIs is tallied whenever a 
CPI is invoked, and can't be tracked ahead of time.

### Edge Cases

Transactions containing exactly 64 top-level instructions will fail as soon as 
the first CPI is pushed onto the execution stack, instead of executing all 64 

> instruction budget the protocol provides. Likewise, any transaction with 

Reviewer: nit (I think):

```suggestion
instructions in the budget the protocol provides. Likewise, any transaction with
```

> 64-X instructions, will fail as soon as X+1 CPIs are pushed onto the stack.

Reviewer: Might just be me, but it wasn't clear to me what the `X` was at first.

```suggestion
`64 - X` instructions, will fail as soon as `X + 1` CPIs are pushed onto the stack.
```

The line itself is good, though.
